[Music]
O Sang
Satvam Samvat Vam Satvam Samadam Manam Se
Janta Sambho Manam Se
Janta Deva Bhagam Yatha Purve Deva Bhagam Yatha Purve Samjhana
Na Upas Sanjna Upas Sate Sanjna Nana Upas Sate Sanjna Nana Upas Sate Sanjna Nana Upas Sate
Sanjna
Nana
[Music]
Upas Sanjna
Gently open your
eyes and your hands Slowly open your eyes and bring your hands back Please
stand up for loosening practices Now
stand up in your place to practice the movements These practices help in
micro circulation This practice
helps in increasing the subtle circulation of the body
Begin with Neck Bending Keep your feet two inches apart
Keep your feet two inches apart Place your arms on your waist
Keep your hands on the waist Exhale slowly and bring your head forward While exhaling,
bend your head forward Take head
back While inhaling, take the head back Exhale, bring your head back to the
normal position
Bring the head to the normal position Right and Left
Neck Bending
Exercise Right and Left Neck Bending Exercise Exhale and bend the head to the right While
exhaling bend the head to the right
Inhale and bring the head back Inhale
and bring the head to the left While
exhaling bring the head to the left Now
bring the head back to the normal position Neck Twisting
Exercise Neck Twisting Exercise Exhale and bend the
head to the right While exhaling bring the head to the right. Inhale and bring the head back to the
normal position Now while exhaling turn the head
to the left.
Inhale and bring the head back to the
normal position Now while inhaling bring the head to the normal position
Now Neck Rotation
Exercise Neck Rotation Exercise Exhale and bring the chin down to the chest While
exhaling place the chin against the throat cavity
Inhale and slowly rotate the
head clockwise While inhaling
take the head back in the clockwise direction  Go Axle Come down Exhale and
come forward Now rotate your head in
anti clockwise direction Now
turn the head in opposite direction Inhale Go back Inhale while inhaling take the
head back Come down Exhale and
bring your head to
normal position Inhale while inhaling
bring your head to normal position Bring your
arms down and bring your hands back Let's
move on to trunk moving Next exercise
Knee Movement Kriya Keep your legs shoulder length apart Keep
both your feet shoulder width apart Bring them
to the level of your
chest Raise your hands in front of your shoulders Turn
the body to the right Exhale and turn the
body to the right Inhale come back Inhale and
come back Axle turn the body towards
the left Exhale and turn the body to the left Come
back and bring your arms down Breathe out
and bring the hands back to the starting position Now
moving on to knee movements
Practice knee movements  Inhale Lift your arms
up to shoulder level Inhale
Bring your arms up to shoulder level Inhale
Bend your knees and come to sitting position Exhale
Bend your knees and
come to sitting position Inhale and come up Inhale and
come back to sitting position Exhale Bend your knees and come down Exhale and come back to
sitting position Again come up Inhale Bring your
arms down and relax Exhale and bring your
hands back down Now
begin our yogasana practice Now we will practice yogasanas
Stand with your feet inches apart
Inhale Bring your
arms up to shoulder level Inhale and
bring your hands up to shoulder level
Interlock your fingers and turn your breasts outwards Bring your
arms up Inhale Raise the heels off the
floor Balance on your toes Lift your heels and
balance on your toes This asana brings
stability and strength to the body This asana
brings balance and strength to the body
Bring the heels down Bring the heels back
Single arms down and relax Exhale and
bring the hands to the normal position
Vrikshasana
Single Bend the Right Leg Exhale and
bend the right leg Place the foot on the
inside of the left thigh
Try to place the sole of the foot on the left foot Inhale
Bring the arms up and join the palms While inhaling
raise your hands up and
join the palms This asana improves neuro
muscular coordination This asana improves neuromuscular coordination. This asana improves neuromuscular coordination. Bring
the arms and leg down Exhale and
bring the hands and right leg down Now we will repeat Vrikshasana on the other
side Now repeat this asana with the other leg Bend
your left leg Place the foot on the
inside of the right thigh Bend the
left leg and place it on the right foot Inhale Bring
the arms up and join your palms While inhaling
raise your hands up and
join the palms Stretch and maintain the posture
Now we will  Now to Padahastasana. We will
practice Padahastasana. Stand with your feet 4
inches apart. Keep your feet 4 inches apart.
Bring the arms up. Exhale and
slowly bend forward. Stretch up
from the waist. Try to stretch the waist. Keep
your palms beside the feet. Keep your
palms near the toes. This asana makes the
spine flexible and helps
digestion. This asana makes our spine
flexible and improves digestion.
Now inhale. Bring your arms up. Now inhale and
slowly come back. Bring
your arms down and relax. Exhale and bring
both the hands down and relax.
Ardha Chakrasana. Place your hands at the
back of your waist. Place your hands
behind the waist. Keep your elbows parallel to each other. Keep
both your shoulders parallel.
Inhale and drop the head
backward. Inhale and take the head back. Exhale
and maintain the posture.
Asana helps to improve
breathing capacity This asana
is helpful in respiratory function Inhale Raise your head
up Inhale bring your head back Exhale
arms down and relax Exhale and
bring your hands back Now come to Trikonasana Put
your hands on your waist Place both hands
on the waist Stand with your feet three to four
feet apart Keep your feet three to four feet
apart Keep your arms up to shoulder
level While inhaling spread both the hands at shoulder level Turn the right foot towards the right
side Turn the toes of the left foot towards the right
side Exhale slowly bending to the right side
Place the right hand behind the right leg Place the right hand behind the right foot
Turn your head and
gaze at your middle finger This asana helps in treating
cervical spondylitis
This asana
is helpful in curing cervical spondylitis Inhale and slowly come
up Breathe  Inhale and slowly come back
Bring your right foot back and turn your
left foot towards the left side
Straighten the toes of your right foot back Now
turn the toes of your left foot towards the left side Exhale and
slowly bend to the left side
Place your left hand behind the left leg Place the
left hand behind the left foot Turn your head
and gaze at your middle finger Turn your head
upwards and gaze at the middle finger Maintain the posture
Try to maintain the posture
Bring your arms down and feet together
Join both the legs and bring the hands back as well Now will move on
to sitting
posture Sit down and legs touch out Slowly sit down
and straighten the legs in front Keep your hands beside
the hips and back
straight Keep the hands near the buttocks and straighten the waist This is
Dandasana This is Dandasana Bend
your knees and put the soles of your feet together
Bend the legs at the knees and
join both the soles  Axillary Hold Your Toes Exhale and
hold your toes Pull your
heels towards your body Bring your heels towards your
body This asana keeps the body
firm and stabilizes the mind This asana
keeps the body firm and the mind stable Now
Stretch Your Legs Come back to Dandasana
Slowly come back to Dandasana
Ardha Ustrasana
Legs Under Your Body A Dashta Asana To practice,
bend your legs and come on your knees Sit
between your heels and knees together
Sit between your ankles with your knees together
This is Vajrasana This is Vajrasana Now Stand on Your Knees
Slowly stand on your knees Place the hands
behind the waist Place your hands behind the waist Inhale Bend the head back
and relax While inhaling, tilt the head backwards This
asana
helps in treating back pain This asana helps in treating back pain Raise your head up and hands
down Exhale Come back and
relax in Vajrasana  Relax in
Vajrasana Spread your knees apart Keep
the palms between the
knees Keep the palms between the knees
Exhale and stretch forward Exhale and
pull the hands forward Bring the chest
and chin to the ground Keep the chest and chin on the ground
Reduce stress and anger
This asana is helpful in reducing stress and anger
Inhale and slowly come back to
Vajrasana
Stretch your legs out Sit in Dandasana and extend your legs
forward Open your legs and come back to Dandasana Now we will move
to Vakrasana Now we will practice Vakrasana
Bend the right leg and place the right foot beside the left knee
Slowly bend the right leg Place the
toes of the right foot near the left knee Bring the left arm around
the right knee
and place the palm beside the right foot
Roll your left hand over the right knee and place it near the right toe Roll your body
to the right and turn  Bend your head and exhale. Turn your
head and body to the right. The
asana increases flexibility of the spine. This
asana increases flexibility in the spine.
Inhale, turn your head back. Inhale, bring your
head back. Release your arms and
stretch your legs. Exhale, come back to the
normal position. Now we will repeat the
same on the other side. Repeat this asana on the left side as well.
Bend the left leg and place the
left foot beside the right knee. Slowly
bend the left leg. Place the toes of the left foot near the right
knee. Bring the right arm
around the left knee beside the left foot.
Roll your right hand over the left knee and
place it near the left toe. Single-swipe the body to the left and turn the
head back. Exhale, turn the
head and body to the left.
Release your arms and stretch your legs. Slowly
come back and straighten the legs. Relax
to relax. Now let us move
to prone posture. Now we
will practice asanas done while lying on the stomach. Bring down on your stomach in
Makarasana Makarasana  Lie down on your stomach in the asana.
Begin with Bhujang Asana.
We will practice Bhujang Asana. Join
your legs together. Join
both the legs. Keep
your arms
straight while inhaling. Place your hands
beside your body inline with your chest. While
exhaling, bend your hands and
place your palms near the chest. Lift chin
and chest up to the navel. While inhaling,
raise your chin and chest till the navel area. This
asana is good for stress management. This
asana helps in relieving stress. Squat down
and release the posture. Now while exhaling,
come back to the normal position. Relax
in Makarasana. Shala Bhasana Join your
legs and put the arms beside your body.
Join both the legs. Bring your hands near the thighs. Keep your arms facing upwards. Keep your
palms facing the sky. Keep the chin on
the ground.
Inhale and raise your legs up while inhaling.
Raise your legs This asana helps
to prevent sacralgia This asana relieves the pain of sacralgia Lift
and bring the legs
down Exhale and bring your legs down
Now we will rest
in Makarasana Relax in Makarasana Keep your feet wide apart
Keep a little gap between your feet
Rest your head on your palms
Place your head on the palms and relax Relax Now
this asana Relax the body and the mind This asana
balances the body and mind Now we
move on to supine
Now we will
practice asanas done while lying down on your back Lay down on your back
Setu
Bandhasana Now we will practice Setu Bandhasana Bend both your knees
and bring your
heels towards the buttocks Bend both your knees and
bring
your heels close to the knees Hold your hips Inhale Raise buttocks
and trunk Fum Bridge While inhaling raise your
buttocks and waist upwards Maintain the posture Emanation and
depression This asana
Tightens the abdominal organs and releases tension.
Exhale and lower down. Come back while exhaling.
Stretch your legs. Straighten your legs.
Relax on your back. Rest on your back.
Pawan
Muktasana. Join your legs. Bend the knees and
bring the thighs to the chest.
Bring your legs close to the chest while bending your knees.
Interlock your fingers and hold your shins. Interlock the
fingers of your hands and
hold the legs. Raise your head up while exhaling. Raise the
head up while exhaling. Maintain the posture.
Try to maintain this asana.
This asana improves digestion. Exhale and
bring the head back. Stretch your
legs and relax. Slowly straighten both the legs. Now
relax in Savasana.
Now we will relax in Savasana. Keep your
arms and legs apart.
Maintain proper distance between the feet and hands. Palms facing the sky.
Keep the palms facing the sky. Close
your eyes. Take a
deep breath and
exhale deeply.  Inhale and exhale Relax each and
every part of your body
from your toes to your head Be aware of each part of the body Let the
entire body relax
Asanas Release All Kinds of Tension This asana
releases all kinds of stress
[Music]
Now Come Back to a Comfortable Seated Posture Come back slowly
and sit in any comfortable posture
Now Perform Kapalabhati Get
ready to practice Kapalabhati
Sit in any meditative posture with your back straight
Sit in any meditative posture with your waist and neck straight Keep your
hands on your knees in Gyan Mudra Keep your hands
in Gyan Mudra Inhale deep and
exhale the breath with forceful contraction of the lower muscles Inhale deeply and exhale by pressing the lower muscles Let's begin our first round of
30 strokes Kapalabhati Begin the first round of Kapalabhati
Narendra Modi himself is
doing yoga at Ram Mandir
Exhale and Relax Now
Exhale and experience peace
Now We Move On  To the second round of 30
strokes Now start the second round of Kapalabhati
and do it in the opposite direction. Breathe out and relax. Now we get
ready for the final round.
Now get ready for the third and final round. Breathe out
and relax.
Kapala energizes the mind and body. Kapalabhati
energizes the body. Now we proceed
to Nadi Shodhan Pranayama. Now we will
practice Anulom Vilom Pranayama. Keep the
left palm upright and the left knee in the Jnana Mudra.
Make the Jnana Mudra of the left hand and the Nasal Angle Mudra of the right hand. Inhale through the left nostril.
Breathe out slowly through the left nostril.
Again through the right nostril. Now
inhale through the right nostril.
Exhale through the left nostril. This one
round. Repeat within four rounds. This is
one round of Anulom Vilom. Practice four more such rounds.
Nadi Shodhana Pranayama Helps
Concentration Nadi Shodhana Pranayama
increases concentration
[Music]
Bring the hands down while exhaling Now Let Us Begin
Bhramari Pranayama Now we will
practice Bhramari Pranayama
Make the Gyan Mudra of the hands
Close the eyes gently and gently inhale slowly Making a humming sound like a
long deep breath While exhaling
pronounce the Makar sound like a bumblebee Let's Begin the First
Round Begin the First Chakra
[Music]
Breathe
[Music] Inhale
[Music] Now we will
perform Bhramari in Shanamukhi Mudra
Now we will do the same practice with Shanamukhi Mudra Adopt
Shanamukhi
Mudra Let's Start the First
Round
[Music]
Breathe
[Music] Bring the
hands
down Bring the hands back Bhramukhi Pranam Calms the
Mind Bhram Pranam Calms the Mind Now It is
time for Dhyana and Meditation Let's
begin the practice of meditation now  Keep your back straight Straighten the
spine Keep your hands in
Jana
Mudra Make the hands in Gyan Mudra and
place them on the knees Gently close your eyes and
lift the chin up for Shyam Bhavi Mudra Close your
eyes gently and
lift the chin slightly Relax and
concentrate on your breath
and attentively single and pure thought
Allow the state of thoughtlessness to occur Let's
meditate Get absorbed in meditation
Meditation is an important component of
yoga It keeps the mind calm and steady and
leads to self-realization
Meditation is the most important part of yoga It
keeps the mind calm and leads us towards self-realization
[Music] [
Music]
[Music]
Now bring your attention to normal breathing
and make a resolution in your mind We have to
always keep our mind balanced
Our self-development is contained in this
I resolve to make myself a healthy, peace-loving and
loving human being I will
try to become one with every person present here I
commit to make my self  Into
a
Healthy Peaceful
Joy-Full and Loving Human Being I
Recognize the Kinship of My Own Life with
Every Other Life I Recognize the Unity of the
Divine Now Bring Your Hands to Namaskar
Mudra for Shanti Paath Bring Your Hands to Namaskar
Mudra for Shanti Paath
[Music]
O
Sarve Bhavantu Sukhin Sarve Santu Niramay Sarve Bhadrani Pashyantu
Ma Kashchit Dukh Bha
Bhave Ma Kashchit Dukh Bha Bhave
Om
[Music]
Shanti
Shanti Bring Your Palms to Yours I
Now Gently Bring Your Hands
Down Thank You Very Much for a Joy-Full and
Wonderful Yoga Sadhana Make
Possibilities Possible
Make Possibilities Possible Now Ko Sambhav